Randlora documentation and some example usage (#2524)
huggingface/peft: docs/source/package_reference/randlora.md

Reviewer: Could you please also add an entry to `_toctree.yml`?

<!--Copyright 2025 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.

⚠️ Note that this file is in Markdown but contain specific syntax for our doc-builder (similar to MDX) that may not be
rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.

-->

# RandLora: Full-rank parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large models 

> [RandLora](https://huggingface.co/papers/2502.00987) is a parameter-efficient fine-tuning technique that is similar to LoRA and VeRA but performs full rank updates to improve performance. RandLora can be particulary usefull when adapting large model to hard tasks that require complex updates while preserving the parameter efficiency of LoRA. The full rank update of RandLora is acheived by linearly scaling random bases. The random bases are a collection of multiple low rank matrices such that the summation of their ranks if greater or equal to the full rank of the parameter matrices. The trainable parameters of RandLora are two diagonal matrices (vectors) that get multiplied with the right hand low rank random bases, in a similar way to VeRA's update. To maintain low memory usage, RandLora uses a custom function that prevents storing unnecessary bases in memory for backpropagation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[RandLora](https://huggingface.co/papers/2502.00987) is a parameter-efficient fine-tuning technique that is similar to [LoRA](https://huggingface.co/papers/2106.09685) and [VeRA](https://huggingface.co/papers/2310.11454) but performs full rank updates to improve performance. RandLora can be particulary usefull when adapting large model to hard tasks that require complex updates while preserving the parameter efficiency of LoRA. The full rank update of RandLora is achieved by linearly scaling random bases. The random bases are a collection of multiple low rank matrices such that the summation of their ranks if greater or equal to the full rank of the parameter matrices. The trainable parameters of RandLora are two diagonal matrices (vectors) that get multiplied with the right hand low rank random bases, in a similar way to VeRA's update. To maintain low memory usage, RandLora uses a custom function that prevents storing unnecessary bases in memory for backpropagation.
```

RandLora presents the noteworthy difference that contrary to other LoRA-like PEFT algorithm, increasing RandLora's random base ranks increases the amount of trainable parameters. Because number of bases x bases rank is constant in RandLora, reducing the rank will increase the number of random bases, hence the number of base-specific trainable diagonal bases.

> Because reducing the rank RandLora's random bases will increase their number, RandLora can become slower to train than LoRA for very small ranks where typically, ranks below 4 with result in a large training time increase. This does not affect inference though as the RandLora adapters can be merged into the pretrained weight matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because reducing the rank of RandLora's random bases will increase their number, RandLora can become slower to train than LoRA for very small ranks where typically, ranks below 4 with result in a large training time increase. This does not affect inference though as the RandLora adapters can be merged into the pretrained weight matrices.
```

I think that is what you mean?

> RandLora additionally supports training with sparse, unary random bases (only containing -1, 0 and 1). These bases are as described in [Bingham et al.](https://cs-people.bu.edu/evimaria/cs565/kdd-rp.pdf) and [Ping et al.](https://hastie.su.domains/Papers/Ping/KDD06_rp.pdf) and could theoretically be used to reduce compute needs by performing aggregations instead of matrix multiplications to create the weight update. This is not currently supported. Although it does not currently reduce compute, using sparse random bases in RandLora can reduce overfitting in some cases. For users intersted in using sparse unary bases, the `sparse` option is recommended over the `very_sparse` one that can reduce perfromance. 

Author: Yes good point thanks, ternary is the correct term
